---
layout: post
title:  Apache Kafka - Part III - ksqlDB
categories: [Apache Kafka,Data,Processing,Streaming,Database,SQL]
excerpt: ksqlDB is the Kafka native database for stream processing applications that streamlines to build stream processing applications with a SQL like interface. 
---
ksqlDB is the OpenSource Kafka native database for stream processing applications that streamlines to build stream processing applications with a SQL like interface to. It aims to streamline building stream processing applications with a high-level SQL-like interface. ksqlDB amalgamates Kafka Streams for stream processing and Kafka Connect to collect event from various data sources. Kafka Connect streamlines to move data into and out of Kafka with a [connector ecosystem](https://docs.confluent.io/home/connect/self-managed/kafka_connectors.html). For example, it is possible to persist events to a JDBC compliant database using [JDBC Sink Connector](https://docs.confluent.io/kafka-connect-jdbc/current/sink-connector/index.html) and to transform data on a JDBC compliant database to a Kafka record using [JDBC Source Connector](https://docs.confluent.io/kafka-connect-jdbc/current/source-connector/index.html).

{% include image.html url="/images/apache-kafka/ksqldb.png" caption="ksqlDB Architecture" %}

# The Benefits
ksqlDB has the ability to apply stream processing constructs like `join, aggregate, transform, filter, windowing` with its SQL-like syntax and without writing JVM code. These SQL statements are compiled into Kafka Streams applications under the hood. The ksqlDB SQL engine parses SQL statement, converts it to KS topologies and runs resultant KS app(s). Parser uses [ANTLR](https://www.antlr.org/) to convert SQL statement into Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) where:
- Each node in tree represents a recognized phrase or token in SQL statement.
- Parser builds relevant KS topology using token it finds, e.g.:

|SQL|KS API|
|----|----|
| `WHERE` | `filter()` |
| `LEFT JOIN` | `leftJoin()` | 

The learning curve is shallow as familiarity on SQL is more prevalent than Kafka Streams API. With SQL it requires less code to express a streaming application that boosts productivity and streamlines testing. The declarative and standardized syntax of SQL enables consistency over projects. Less coding with a declarative language eases to explore records in topics and having materialized views. As its' core and architectural components (Kafka Streams, Kafka Connect) are built on JVM stack, cross-platform deployments become easy. Following kSQL creates a source connector that periodically imports data from `users` table of a PostgreSQL schema into Kafka topic named `jdbc-users`: 
```sql
CREATE SOURCE CONNECTOR `jdbc-connector` WITH (
    "connector.class"='io.confluent.connect.jdbc.JdbcSourceConnector', 
    "connection.url"='jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/my.db', 
    "mode"='bulk’, 
    "topic.prefix"='jdbc-’, 
    "table.whitelist"='users’, 
    "key"='username'); 
```

ksqlDB comes with built-in CLI and REST interfaces for executing commands and queries in an interactive way.

CLI:

```shell
ksql> SELECT USERID, COUNT(*) AS task_count
>FROM task_stream
>GROUP BY USERID EMIT CHANGES;

+----------------------------------------+---------------+
|USERID                                  |TASK_COUNT     |
+----------------------------------------+---------------+
|sdone                                   |8              |
|jsmith                                  |9              |
|sdone                                   |9              |
|jsmith                                  |10             |

>CTRL+C
Query terminated
```

REST call:
```JavaScript
fetch(`http://${window.location.hostname}:8088/query`,
    {
        method: 'post',
        headers: {
            "Content-Type": "application/vnd.ksql.v1+json; charset=utf-8",
            "Accept": "application/vnd.ksql.v1+json"
        },
        body: JSON.stringify({
            ksql: 'SELECT USERID, COUNT(*) AS task_count FROM task_table GROUP BY USERID EMIT CHANGES;',
            streamsProperties: { 'ksql.streams.auto.offset.reset': 'earliest' }
        })
    });
```

Even ksqlDB offers lots of benefits, it does not completely replace the need for Kafka Streams. SQL falls short to implement complex logic and use-cases where imperative logic is needed rather than declarative logic.

# Similarities and Differences with RDBMS
As the name tells itself, ksqlDB has its roots on database systems especially on Relational Database Systems (RDBMS). It has an SQL interface with the support of DDL and DML statements. It accepts commands and queries over network via clients on CLI, REST and Java API. It is possible to generate schemas and user-defined types. SQL statements can also be enriched via built-in functions on mathematical, string manipulation, time, table, geo-spatial domains. For fault-tolerance and resiliency it has the ability to perform data replication using Kafka under-the hood. Multiple ksqlDB instances in a cluster can process and read shared statements that are written on command topic of Kafka cluster.     

ksqlDB outperforms classical RDBMSs as it provides the capability to model and query real-time data streams by establishing stream, table duality via its enhanced DDL, DML statements. With the push queries (will be explained soon) mechanism, it can execute continuous queries on unbounded event streams with emitting results and updates of statements that it is ordered to execute. As a first-class-citizen of Kafka ecosystem it can integrate with Schema Registry for schema management that enables schema versioning, compatibility validation, transmission optimization via serialization protocols (e.g. Avro, ProtoBuf), data/type inference and data model consistency over implementations that benefit from ksqlDB. Utilizing HA, fault-tolerance, failover capabilities of Kafka cluster is another advantage for system reliance. With the underlying Kafka Streams usage, it is possible to have materialized/local snapshot of data on remote storage which is Kafka cluster in fact. Co-location of compute node and data (KS state stores) is more performant. Another performance benefit is that the storage layer can be scaled independently from DB engine via scaling Kafka cluster up.

The main difference between ksqlDB and RDBMS is consistency model of transactions. ksqlDB uses eventual consistency that it derives from Kafka. On the other hand, RDBMS implements ACID (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) model. Hence, while developing products with ksqlDB this difference should be taken into consideration.

<div>
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Eventual Consistency <a href="https://t.co/2dMrtfDGAW">pic.twitter.com/2dMrtfDGAW</a></p>&mdash; Greg Young (@gregyoung) <a href="https://twitter.com/gregyoung/status/1101642600342265857?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 2, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
<div>

